docs/manual.md, before:

Semblance 2
===========

Behavior
--------

### Translator


Semblance is interpreted language. Reader works in two passes, first performing lexical analysis and converting input
stream into list of tokens which when parsed into list of S-expressions.

Interpreter has no knowledge of special characters used in input stream, like `'`, `` `  `` or `,`
(single quote, backquote and comma). This characters (called read macros) are handled by parser and expanded
into correct lisp forms before interpretation. For example `'expr` is expanded into (quote expr).
Users of interpreter can register their handlers to process more read macros.

As all Semblance forms are JVM Serializable objects, so parsed program can be saved as standard Java Object stream.
This allows to bypass translation phase for often-used programs and speed up execution.

Semblance is *case sensitive*

Symbols
-------

Symbols in the program can be bound to variables/functions/macros or can be unbound. Bound symbols are evaluated to
the value they are bound to, unbound symbols will cause run-time exception. The only exception to this rule are
keyword symbols. Keywords are just symbols which start with a `:` and always evaluate to themselves.

Consider following two short programs:

    (set v (+ 1 2))
    (println v)

and

    (println v)

and

    (println :v)

In the first program, symbol `v` is bound to result of computation of `1 + 2`. Statement `(println v)` will
have `var` evaluated prior to calling `println` function and output will be **3**

Second program does not have symbol `v` bound to any value, so exception will be thrown.

Last program will evaluate `:v` to itself and print **:v**


Function parameters
-------------------

Positional parameters are supported as usual. Optional parameters are supported as well

    (positional parameters &optional optional parameters)

 each optional parameter can be of following format
   - name - simplest possible case. In case parameter is omitted it will be set to NIL
   - (name default_value) - if parameter is omitted, then default_value will be supplied
   - (name default_value flag) - same as above, but flag will be set to *T* if parameter was passed to function
      and to *F* if default_value was used

 Catch-all &rest parameters are supported:

    (positional parameters &optional parameters &rest list-to-catch-all)

 All extra parameters which do not fit in positional and optional parameters will be passed as list in `list-to-catch-all`

 Keyword parameter support will be added later.


Data types
----------


  **LIST**
  
    (value value ...)
    
  List is a function itself. Expression `(list-var 3)` will return value of the fourth list elevent (lists are 
  zero-based)
  
    (let ((x '(1 2 3))) 
         (x 1))
    ('(1 2 3) 1)
    
  Both expressions above will return **2**
    
  **VECTOR**
    
    [value value ...]
    
  Vector is a function as well, so examples of index-based access of lists above can be applied to vectors as well.
  
    (let ((x [1 2 3])) 
         (x 1))
    ([1 2 3] 1)
    
  If index is negative it will be treated as index from the end of the list. 
  
    ('(1 2 3 4) -1) --> 4
  Vectors and lists support additional operations. For example if supplied with two indices it will return a slice of the
  list.
  
    ('(1 2 3 4) 1 2) --> (2 3)
    
  Some of operations are denoted by keywords, for example `head` (or `car`) and `tail` (or `cdr`) are implemented as
  collection operations `:head` and `:tail` (of course `car` and `cdr` are still supported)
  
    ('(1 2 3) :head) --> 1
    ('(1 2 3) :tail) --> (2 3)
    
  Other supported operations are:
    
   - :last - take the last element of collection 
   - :reverse - reverse the collection
   - :take n - take first `n` elements of collection
   - :drop n - take all but first `n` elements of collection
   - :sort - sort collection. `:sort` may accept additional parameter `:desc` to sort in descending order. Attempt to
     sort a collection which holds elements of different types will cause runtime error.
    
  Some of keyword operations can accept parameters.
  
    ('(1 2 3) :drop 2) --> (3)
    ('("bz" "ac" "ba") :sort) --> ("ac", "ba", "bz")
    ('("bz" "ac" "ba") :sort :desc) --> ("bz", "ba", "ac")
    
  Collection operations like `:reverse` or `:sort` do not modify collection which they work on, they create a new 
  one.
    
  Though lists and vectors support the same operations their performance can be very different. Vectors are fast when
  accessing items by index, lists are fast when evaluating tail or appending/prepending values.
    
  **MAP**
  
    {key value key value ... ...}
    
  Keys can be anything, but customary they are keywords. Map is a function, just like lists or vectors.
  Map can accept either one or two parameters. If one parameter is supplied then it is treated as map key and 
  corresponding value (or NIL) is returned. IF two parameters are supplied, then first is treated as key and the 
  second one as a value and that value is stored in the map associated with a key.
  
    ({:a 1 :b 2 :c 3} :b)
    
  will return **2**
  
    ({:a 1 :b 2 :c3} :b 5)
    
  will associate key **:b** with value **5** and will return value **5** as well.
  
      
  There are more operations available for collections.
  
  **CONTAINS**
  
    (contains collection element)
    
  Checks whether `collection` contains an `element`. If `collection` is a map, then check if key equal to  `element` is
  present in the map. For list and vector linear search for element is performed.
  Result is either **T** or **F**
  
    (contains {:a 1 :b 2} :a) --> T
    (contains {:a 1 :b 2} :c) --> F
    (contains '(1 2 3) 2) --> T
    (contains [1 2 3] 4) --> F
  
  **FIND**
  
    (find collection element)

  Returns zero-based index of `element` in the `collection`. If there is no `element` in the `collection` then **-1** 
  is returned. `find` works on both lists and vectors. Bear in mind that access by index is O(n) for lists 
  and O(1) for vectors.
  
    (find '(1 2 3) 3) --> 2
    (find [1 2 3] 4) --> -1 

Functions
---------

  Semblance probably includes more special forms than Common Lisp. That's done mostly for efficiency and sometimes
  to avoid complex parameter processing. Some of the special forms may later be rewritten as functions
  or macros in standard library.

  For the user of the language it should not matter whether operation is implemented as special form, function or a
  macro.

  **PRINTLN**

    (println value1 value2 value3 ...)

  prints all values separated by space and returns NIL

  **LET**

    (let variables body)

  where `variables` is list of (name value) definitions and `body` is sequence of S-expressions.
  Example:

    (let ((x 40)
          (y 2))
         (+ x y))

  Let is similar to Common Lisp `let*`, all bindings are done one by one, not in parallel. Let evaluates to last
  value in `body`

  **IF**

    (if condition then-expr else-expr?)

  Evaluates condition, if it is not equal to **F** executes then-expr, if condition is **F** and else-expr is present
  it will be executed

     (if (= a b)
         (progn ()()...)
         (println "False"))

  **QUOTE**

     (quote expression)
     or
     'expression

  Returns expression without evaluating it, for example

     (quote (+ 1 2))

  will be evaluated to `(+ 1 2)`


  **BACKQUOTE**

      (backquote expression)
      or
      `expression

  Like quote, but prevents evaluation of every symbol, except those which are un-escaped by `,` (comma)
  For example:

      `(+ ,a ,b)

  will evaluate to `(+ 1 2)` if current context has `a` bound to `1` and `b` bound to `2`.
  
  **PROGN**

    (progn (s-expression)*)

  Executes multiple expressions one by one. Result of last expression is returned

  **FN**

    (fn (parameters) (s-expression)*)

  Defines a nameless function.
  
  **FN\***
  
    (fn* (s-expression)*)
  
  Defines a nameless function with a single implicit parameter named `it`.
  
    ((fn* (* it it)) 3)
    
  Will evalute square of **3** and return **9**

  **NAMESPACE**

     (namespace name (s-expression)*)

  Declares a new namespace with a name `name` in current context. Executes body and after execution binds
  all declared symbols in the new namespace.
  
  **FUNCALL**
  
  Calls a function.

     (funcall function (parameters))

  For example:

     (defun mult2 (x) (* 2 x))
     (funcall mult2 (4))

     or

     (funcall
        (fn (x) (* 2 x))
        (4))
    
  **DEFUN**
  
    (defun name (params) (s-expression)*)
    
  Creates a function with parameters `params` and body defined by a list of expressions and binds it to name `name` in current context.
  Example:
    
    (defun add (x y) (+ x y))
    (add 1 2)
    
  will result in **3**
  
  **VAR**

    (var (name value) [(name value) ...])
  Binds evaluated `value` to symbol `name` in the current context. May evaluate and bind multiple variables.
  Returns latest evaluated value
  
  
  **SET**
  
    (set name expression)

  Binds evaluated `expression` to a `name` in current context. Essentially works as `var`, but only for one variable

  **NAMESPACE**

    (namespace name (s-expression)*)

  Declares namespace named `name`. All variable, function and macro binding in the s-expressions will be bound
  inside this namespace. Following example shows function `pi` and variable `e` bound in `math` namespace:

    (namespace math
       (var e 2.718)
       (defun pi () 3.14))

  Such bindings can be accessed using full name

    (* 2 math/pi)
    (println math/e)

  Inside the namespace those names can be accessed without the qualifier.

    (namespace math
       (var pi 3.14))
       (var tau (* 2 pi)))

  **BLOCK**

    (block name forms*)

  Defines a named block. Last evaluated value is returned from block unless `return` is called inside.

  **RETURN**

    (return [value])

  Returns from block. Block is defined by `block`, `progn`, `let`, `fn` or `namespace`. Optional return value can
  be supplied. If no return value is supplied, then `NIL` will be returned. If `return` is called outside of the block,
  then program itself will terminate.

    (let ((x 1)
          (y 2))
         (return y)
         x)

  Result of the `let` expression above will be 2, not 1.

  **RETURN-FROM**

    (return-from block-name [value])

  Returns from a named block. Named block is defined by `block`, `defun` or `namespace`. If value is not supplied `NIL`
  will be returned. If there is no block named `block-name` in the execution stack then program will terminate and
  value supplied to `return-from` will be returned.

    (block b1
        (block b2
            (block b3
                (return-from b1 5))
         2 )
     3)

  will return **5**.

    (block b1
        (block b2
              (block b3
                    (return-from b2 5))
         2 )
     3)

  will return **3**, as atom **3** will be last thing evaluated after execution of block `b2` is terminated by `return-from b2`.
  
  **LOOP**
  
    (loop condition-expression (s-expression)*)
    
  Loops through list of `s-expressions` while `condition-expression` evaluates to `T`.
  To break out of the loop use `break` special form. `return` form will not work as loop creates implicit
  block which will eat return value and return to `condition-expression` evaluation.
      
      (let ((x 5) (y 0))
           (loop (> x 0)
                 (set x (- x 1)) 
                 (set y (+ y 1)) 
                 (if (= y 3)
                     (break y)) 
      )) 
      
  The program above will return **3**
     
Macros
------

  Currently there is no macro expansion phase in the program execution time, however there are plans to introduce
  such phase. In the time being macros are expanded as they are executed.

  **DEFMACRO**

    (defmacro name (parameters) (s-expression)*)

  Defines a macro named `name` with a list of formal `parameters` and body of s-expressions. Just like
  other lisp out there you can use backquote to escape macro body.
  You need to use comma to un-escape parameters and you can still use `@` to unwrap lists.

    (defmacro defun
         (name params &rest body)
         `(var ,name (fn ,params ,@body)))

  Example defines a `defun` macro which takes three parameters `name`, `params` and `body` and binds to symbol
  in `name` a function with parameters `params` and `body` of s-expressions.

Commit message:

Added :map list operation. Modified list operations to accept context as a parameter.

docs/manual.md, after:

Semblance 2
===========

Behavior
--------

### Translator


Semblance is interpreted language. Reader works in two passes, first performing lexical analysis and converting input
stream into list of tokens which when parsed into list of S-expressions.

Interpreter has no knowledge of special characters used in input stream, like `'`, `` `  `` or `,`
(single quote, backquote and comma). This characters (called read macros) are handled by parser and expanded
into correct lisp forms before interpretation. For example `'expr` is expanded into (quote expr).
Users of interpreter can register their handlers to process more read macros.

As all Semblance forms are JVM Serializable objects, so parsed program can be saved as standard Java Object stream.
This allows to bypass translation phase for often-used programs and speed up execution.

Semblance is *case sensitive*

Symbols
-------

Symbols in the program can be bound to variables/functions/macros or can be unbound. Bound symbols are evaluated to
the value they are bound to, unbound symbols will cause run-time exception. The only exception to this rule are
keyword symbols. Keywords are just symbols which start with a `:` and always evaluate to themselves.

Consider following two short programs:

    (set v (+ 1 2))
    (println v)

and

    (println v)

and

    (println :v)

In the first program, symbol `v` is bound to result of computation of `1 + 2`. Statement `(println v)` will
have `var` evaluated prior to calling `println` function and output will be **3**

Second program does not have symbol `v` bound to any value, so exception will be thrown.

Last program will evaluate `:v` to itself and print **:v**


Function parameters
-------------------

Positional parameters are supported as usual. Optional parameters are supported as well

    (positional parameters &optional optional parameters)

 each optional parameter can be of following format
   - name - simplest possible case. In case parameter is omitted it will be set to NIL
   - (name default_value) - if parameter is omitted, then default_value will be supplied
   - (name default_value flag) - same as above, but flag will be set to *T* if parameter was passed to function
      and to *F* if default_value was used

 Catch-all &rest parameters are supported:

    (positional parameters &optional parameters &rest list-to-catch-all)

 All extra parameters which do not fit in positional and optional parameters will be passed as list in `list-to-catch-all`

 Keyword parameter support will be added later.


Data types
----------


  **LIST**
  
    (value value ...)
    
  List is a function itself. Expression `(list-var 3)` will return value of the fourth list elevent (lists are 
  zero-based)
  
    (let ((x '(1 2 3))) 
         (x 1))
    ('(1 2 3) 1)
    
  Both expressions above will return **2**
    
  **VECTOR**
    
    [value value ...]
    
  Vector is a function as well, so examples of index-based access of lists above can be applied to vectors as well.
  
    (let ((x [1 2 3])) 
         (x 1))
    ([1 2 3] 1)
    
  If index is negative it will be treated as index from the end of the list. 
  
    ('(1 2 3 4) -1) --> 4
  Vectors and lists support additional operations. For example if supplied with two indices it will return a slice of the
  list.
  
    ('(1 2 3 4) 1 2) --> (2 3)
    
  Some of operations are denoted by keywords, for example `head` (or `car`) and `tail` (or `cdr`) are implemented as
  collection operations `:head` and `:tail` (of course `car` and `cdr` are still supported)
  
    ('(1 2 3) :head) --> 1
    ('(1 2 3) :tail) --> (2 3)
    
  Other supported operations are:
    
   - :last - take the last element of collection 
   - :reverse - reverse the collection
   - :take n - take first `n` elements of collection
   - :drop n - take all but first `n` elements of collection
   - :sort - sort collection. `:sort` may accept additional parameter `:desc` to sort in descending order. Attempt to
     sort a collection which holds elements of different types will cause runtime error.
   - :map - apply a function to each element of the collection. Function that accepts one parameter
     should be supplied as additional parameter to `:map`
    
  Some of keyword operations can accept parameters.
  
    ('(1 2 3) :drop 2) --> (3)
    ('("bz" "ac" "ba") :sort) --> ("ac", "ba", "bz")
    ('("bz" "ac" "ba") :sort :desc) --> ("bz", "ba", "ac")
    
    (let ((double (fn (x) (* 2 x))))
         ('(1 2 3) :map double) )  --> (2 4 6)
    
  Collection operations like `:reverse`, `:sort` or `:map` do not modify collection which they work on, they create 
  a new one.
    
  Though lists and vectors support the same operations their performance can be very different. Vectors are fast when
  accessing items by index, lists are fast when evaluating tail or appending/prepending values.
    
  **MAP**
  
    {key value key value ... ...}
    
  Keys can be anything, but customary they are keywords. Map is a function, just like lists or vectors.
  Map can accept either one or two parameters. If one parameter is supplied then it is treated as map key and 
  corresponding value (or NIL) is returned. IF two parameters are supplied, then first is treated as key and the 
  second one as a value and that value is stored in the map associated with a key.
  
    ({:a 1 :b 2 :c 3} :b)
    
  will return **2**
  
    ({:a 1 :b 2 :c3} :b 5)
    
  will associate key **:b** with value **5** and will return value **5** as well.
  
      
  There are more operations available for collections.
  
  **CONTAINS**
  
    (contains collection element)
    
  Checks whether `collection` contains an `element`. If `collection` is a map, then check if key equal to  `element` is
  present in the map. For list and vector linear search for element is performed.
  Result is either **T** or **F**
  
    (contains {:a 1 :b 2} :a) --> T
    (contains {:a 1 :b 2} :c) --> F
    (contains '(1 2 3) 2) --> T
    (contains [1 2 3] 4) --> F
  
  **FIND**
  
    (find collection element)

  Returns zero-based index of `element` in the `collection`. If there is no `element` in the `collection` then **-1** 
  is returned. `find` works on both lists and vectors. Bear in mind that access by index is O(n) for lists 
  and O(1) for vectors.
  
    (find '(1 2 3) 3) --> 2
    (find [1 2 3] 4) --> -1 

Functions
---------

  Semblance probably includes more special forms than Common Lisp. That's done mostly for efficiency and sometimes
  to avoid complex parameter processing. Some of the special forms may later be rewritten as functions
  or macros in standard library.

  For the user of the language it should not matter whether operation is implemented as special form, function or a
  macro.

  **PRINTLN**

    (println value1 value2 value3 ...)

  prints all values separated by space and returns NIL

  **LET**

    (let variables body)

  where `variables` is list of (name value) definitions and `body` is sequence of S-expressions.
  Example:

    (let ((x 40)
          (y 2))
         (+ x y))

  Let is similar to Common Lisp `let*`, all bindings are done one by one, not in parallel. Let evaluates to last
  value in `body`

  **IF**

    (if condition then-expr else-expr?)

  Evaluates condition, if it is not equal to **F** executes then-expr, if condition is **F** and else-expr is present
  it will be executed

     (if (= a b)
         (progn ()()...)
         (println "False"))

  **QUOTE**

     (quote expression)
     or
     'expression

  Returns expression without evaluating it, for example

     (quote (+ 1 2))

  will be evaluated to `(+ 1 2)`


  **BACKQUOTE**

      (backquote expression)
      or
      `expression

  Like quote, but prevents evaluation of every symbol, except those which are un-escaped by `,` (comma)
  For example:

      `(+ ,a ,b)

  will evaluate to `(+ 1 2)` if current context has `a` bound to `1` and `b` bound to `2`.
  
  **PROGN**

    (progn (s-expression)*)

  Executes multiple expressions one by one. Result of last expression is returned

  **FN**

    (fn (parameters) (s-expression)*)

  Defines a nameless function.
  
  **FN\***
  
    (fn* (s-expression)*)
  
  Defines a nameless function with a single implicit parameter named `it`.
  
    ((fn* (* it it)) 3)
    
  Will evalute square of **3** and return **9**

  **NAMESPACE**

     (namespace name (s-expression)*)

  Declares a new namespace with a name `name` in current context. Executes body and after execution binds
  all declared symbols in the new namespace.
  
  **FUNCALL**
  
  Calls a function.

     (funcall function (parameters))

  For example:

     (defun mult2 (x) (* 2 x))
     (funcall mult2 (4))

     or

     (funcall
        (fn (x) (* 2 x))
        (4))
    
  **DEFUN**
  
    (defun name (params) (s-expression)*)
    
  Creates a function with parameters `params` and body defined by a list of expressions and binds it to name `name` in current context.
  Example:
    
    (defun add (x y) (+ x y))
    (add 1 2)
    
  will result in **3**
  
  **VAR**

    (var (name value) [(name value) ...])
  Binds evaluated `value` to symbol `name` in the current context. May evaluate and bind multiple variables.
  Returns latest evaluated value
  
  
  **SET**
  
    (set name expression)

  Binds evaluated `expression` to a `name` in current context. Essentially works as `var`, but only for one variable

  **NAMESPACE**

    (namespace name (s-expression)*)

  Declares namespace named `name`. All variable, function and macro binding in the s-expressions will be bound
  inside this namespace. Following example shows function `pi` and variable `e` bound in `math` namespace:

    (namespace math
       (var e 2.718)
       (defun pi () 3.14))

  Such bindings can be accessed using full name

    (* 2 math/pi)
    (println math/e)

  Inside the namespace those names can be accessed without the qualifier.

    (namespace math
       (var pi 3.14))
       (var tau (* 2 pi)))

  **BLOCK**

    (block name forms*)

  Defines a named block. Last evaluated value is returned from block unless `return` is called inside.

  **RETURN**

    (return [value])

  Returns from block. Block is defined by `block`, `progn`, `let`, `fn` or `namespace`. Optional return value can
  be supplied. If no return value is supplied, then `NIL` will be returned. If `return` is called outside of the block,
  then program itself will terminate.

    (let ((x 1)
          (y 2))
         (return y)
         x)

  Result of the `let` expression above will be 2, not 1.

  **RETURN-FROM**

    (return-from block-name [value])

  Returns from a named block. Named block is defined by `block`, `defun` or `namespace`. If value is not supplied `NIL`
  will be returned. If there is no block named `block-name` in the execution stack then program will terminate and
  value supplied to `return-from` will be returned.

    (block b1
        (block b2
            (block b3
                (return-from b1 5))
         2 )
     3)

  will return **5**.

    (block b1
        (block b2
              (block b3
                    (return-from b2 5))
         2 )
     3)

  will return **3**, as atom **3** will be last thing evaluated after execution of block `b2` is terminated by `return-from b2`.
  
  **LOOP**
  
    (loop condition-expression (s-expression)*)
    
  Loops through list of `s-expressions` while `condition-expression` evaluates to `T`.
  To break out of the loop use `break` special form. `return` form will not work as loop creates implicit
  block which will eat return value and return to `condition-expression` evaluation.
      
      (let ((x 5) (y 0))
           (loop (> x 0)
                 (set x (- x 1)) 
                 (set y (+ y 1)) 
                 (if (= y 3)
                     (break y)) 
      )) 
      
  The program above will return **3**
     
Macros
------

  Currently there is no macro expansion phase in the program execution time, however there are plans to introduce
  such phase. In the time being macros are expanded as they are executed.

  **DEFMACRO**

    (defmacro name (parameters) (s-expression)*)

  Defines a macro named `name` with a list of formal `parameters` and body of s-expressions. Just like
  other lisp out there you can use backquote to escape macro body.
  You need to use comma to un-escape parameters and you can still use `@` to unwrap lists.

    (defmacro defun
         (name params &rest body)
         `(var ,name (fn ,params ,@body)))

  Example defines a `defun` macro which takes three parameters `name`, `params` and `body` and binds to symbol
  in `name` a function with parameters `params` and `body` of s-expressions.
